Google Analytics Capstone Project (Case one) using Cyclistic (Divvy) bike data

This Case Study was completed as part of the Google Data Analytics Professional Certificate.

The code for data cleaning and analyzing can be found in this folder and the visualisations on Tableau are shown in my vizzes (https://public.tableau.com/app/profile/jinxin.dong)


Step one: Ask
What is the problem you are trying to solve?
A: What are the differences between casual riders and annual members for using Cyclistic bikes?
How can your insights drive business decisions?
A: After identifying the differences, the results can be used to provide some guidelines or suggestions for encouraging the causal riders to buy memberships.

Step two: Prepare
How is the data organized?
A: The data include 13 columns and record the details of customers using the bicycle.
Are there issues with bias or credibility in this data? 
A: The data don’t have a bias and they are credible since they are provided by the official website
Does your data ROCCC? 
A: Reliability: This data is reliable since they are provided by the official website
Originality: This is an original dataset 
Comprehensiveness: This data is comprehensive. It includes all customers in the study area.
Current: This data was collected from 202101 to 202112. 
Cited: The data has been made available by Motivate International Inc.

Step three: Process
What tools are you choosing and why?
A: Python. I have more experience in Python and it is convenient.
What steps have you taken to ensure that your data is clean? 
A: Remove duplicate or irrelevant observations and identify whether it includes all required values (none of them should be null). Then investigate whether all categories and values in a database are set in the appropriate format. Afterward, started and ended time should be logical, which means the ended time should be later than the started time. 
Remove duplicate or irrelevant observations
Fix structural errors
Handle missing data
How can you verify that your data is clean and ready to analyze?
A: At the end of the data cleaning process, you should be able to answer these questions as a part of basic validation:  Does the data make sense?
Does the data follow the appropriate rules for its field?
Does it prove or disprove your working theory, or bring any insight to light?
Can you find trends in the data to help you form your next theory?
Have you documented your cleaning process so you can review and share those results?
A: Yes

Step four: Analyze
How should you organize your data to perform analysis on it?
A: I organize the data into dataframe format
 Has your data been properly formatted?
A: yes
What surprises did you discover in the data? 
A: Members barely use the docked bike and causal people spend more time on trip.
What trends or relationships did you find in the data? 
A: The date of different customers using the bikes are different. Casual people prefer to have a trip on Friday and Saturday, while members prefer to use bikes from Monday to Friday. Members have more trips in most months of 2021 (except to July and August), while the length of trips of casual people are higher than that of members in 8 months. The most popular start and end stations for different customers are also different.
How will these insights help answer your business questions?
A: They can help us to understand the preferences of causal people including which type of bike they prefer, which locations are their favorite, and when they use the bikes. Based on these investigation, we can understand how, when, and where to use digital media for influencing casual riders to become members.

Step five: Share
Were you able to answer the question of how annual members and casual riders use Cyclistic bikes differently? 
A: Yes, the details can be found in the Tableau vizzes and the answer in the last step.
Can data visualization help you share your findings? 
A: The visualization shows the differences between members and casual riders. 

Step six: Act
What is your final conclusion based on your analysis?
A: 1. The members barely use the docked bike, while 15 % of causal riders choose the docked bike.
     2. Causal riders spend much more time on the bikes, especially from May to September, although Causal riders have fewer trips in most months of 2021.
     3. Casual riders use bikes mainly on Friday and Saturday, while annual members tend to use  them for getting to and from work on Weekdays.
     4. The most popular stations for casual riders include the Streeter Dr & Grand Ave, Michigan Ave & Oak St, and Millenium Park stations.
How could your team and business apply your insights?
A: Based on these findings, our team can figure out the time and locations in which causal riders usually use bikes. Thus, we can use digital media at appropriate time and locations to influence casual riders to become members.
Is there additional data you could use to expand on your findings?
A: 1. The data from the previous years can be used to compare the tendency
     2. Riders’ data (i.e. personal details) will facilitate more targeted marketing strategies

